What is this?
=============

In contracts, a variety of terms may be implied by law, that is, they
are treated as if they are there, even though they are not included in
the text.

For example, the Sale of Goods Act 1979 deals with goods being fit for
the purpose and of satisfactory quality. The Supply of Goods and
Services Act 1982 says that reasonable care and skill will be used in
providing services. The Consumer Protection (Distance Selling)
Regulations 2000 deal with the time within which goods must be
delivered.

Other terms may be implied into a contract by the courts, for example
because of necessity, established usage in commercial contracts,
reasonableness and so on.

Because of all this, it can be difficult to decide whether any
particular term applies in any particular contract or not. What the
Terms and Conditions are doing is to exclude all these various
warranties and conditions, so as to add some clarity to our obligations
and our relationship with our users. Instead, the Terms and Conditions
themselves set out how far our responsibilities go, namely that the
service is provided 'as is'.

The backup policies we will follow are good and secure, and will cover
most conceivable eventualities, but it is impossible to be 100% certain.
Our recommendation is that in using the service you should take the
usual precautions you would take with any computer system: keep copies
of essential data and codes, copy your most important results away to
your home machine, and so on. Almost certainly, all this will be
unnecessary, but it is as well to be sure.
